---
layout: post
title: "Failure"
categories:
- blog
published: false
---

Failure is a strange thing.

It is not uncommon to be scared of failure. I certainly know I am.

But when I think about it, I haven't really failed at anything in a 
catastrophic way.

Sure, I've failed a test in school before. But I never failed a class or a 
project or anything of consequence. Usually when I failed a test, well, so did
everyone else so it didn't really matter. 

I remember scoring a 5/10 on an exam once, pretty big failure in my mind. The
average was a 3/10 so I got an "A" anyways. Go figure.

But before a big test that fear of failure would always start to 
bubble up. Maybe it was test anxiety or something, though it never really
effected my performance, just my sleep the night before.

I was worried I would fail at getting a job. I bombed an interview at Google
and didn't even get an automated rejection email from several other big name
places I applied. But again, I didn't actually fail. I got a job offer from a
place that I wanted a job offer from. All in all, it turned out well.

When I run into nasty bugs or unsolvable issues at work, I feel like I am
going to fail. The project will have to be canceled because a critical bug
can't be fixed or we won't get the scheduled deadline. But every time I figure
something out; I get help from a colleague, we find a work-around, the project
gets done one way or another.

There is nothing in my history that suggests I need to worry so much about
failure. Even if I did fail in some epic way, what would that mean?

If I got fired, couldn't I get another job without too much hassle? Developers
are in demand, I think I am pretty good at what I do, I've made friends with
lots of other local developers, I'm not living paycheck to paycheck.

I wonder sometimes if the fact that I haven't had a major failure means I am
not taking enough risks. Not pushing myself enough. Playing it too safe.

In hindsight I find myself pulling up short, stopping when things feel 
uncertain and scary. Am I not stretching myself? When I work on side-projects I
usually end up just throwing the code on Github &mdash; I'm just putting it out 
there, if it fails then I lose nothing. If I had tried to turn some of the apps
into a business, quit my job, and then found myself with only 7 customers, a 
failure would have been worse.

But the part that gets me sometimes is that I didn't even try. It's so
irrational when you look at in after the fact. Historically, I pick the low
upside option with zero risk, instead of the high upside with low risk.

I look at my 401k form and see that it recommends I pick a higher risk 
allocation because I am young. But my brain is all like "Risk? With my money? No
way, I want all my dollars to be safe and sound!".

Maybe it's that psychological thing that a makes losing $50 has more of an 
effect than winning $50. It's the same value, but losing feels so much worse.

I'd like to say that I'll take more risks now, I mean it's only logical, right?
But I don't know what is going to make me change all of the sudden. It starts
to become some next-level Inception thinking: I don't want to fail at the task
of taking more risks, but that fear is preventing me for doing anything.

I reference Merlin Mann all the time (sorry, I'm just a big fanboy) and I am
constantly reminded of a quip he made once. I don't know if he even realized
how powerful it was, I can't really find any references to it and it's near
impossible to find it in the proverbial haystack of podcasts I've listened to.

Anyways, what he was something along the lines of: at the end of the day, no 
matter how stressed out or worried you are about something at your job, sit
back and realize you are just a person pressing buttons on a keyboard in an
air-conditioned office. 

It could be a lot fucking worse.

